Hi, I am Patricia Pinot.
I am an economist
and executive director at MMT UK Policy Research Group,
a think tank that produces policy papers based on an
accurate understanding of the UK monetary system
to advance public purpose in the United Kingdom.
Today, the main way governments manage inflation is
by raising and lowering interest rates.
What most people don't realize is
that this system involves our policy makers effectively
building in and maintaining a certain level
of unemployment in the economy.
Policy makers understand it like this
when unemployment goes up,
workers have less bargaining power
and wages grow more slowly,
thereby reducing the risk of inflation.
When unemployment goes down,
workers have more bargaining power
and wages tend to rise faster,
which increases the risk of inflation.
This is rarely discussed in public discourse,
but deliberately allowing unemployment to rise is central to
how inflation is controlled in a neoliberal economy.
The Problem with this paradigm is that it takes
for granted that some people must be permanently excluded
from economic life,
but unemployment is not just a statistic.
It imposes a real and lasting human and societal costs
Without Access to jobs, people face social exclusion
and risk, long-term harm to their own wellbeing,
and that of their communities.
Using unemployment
to manage prices is not only socially harmful,
it is also a very inefficient way to stabilize the economy.
My name is Pina Chen.
I'm a professor of economics at Bard College, uh,
the president of the Leave Economics Institute,
and I've authored in 2020, uh, the case for a job guarantee,
which outlines the economic case
and the various benefits for the program.
But I've worked also at the policy level
studying real life employment programs
and working with governments on thinking about what kind of,
uh, design features programs, uh, as this might have
on the efficiency question.
You know, we have so narrowly, uh,
defined a society efficiency is something that, um,
falls in, in this worldview that, uh, as long
as there's some kind of return
and usually a financial return to that activity, then that
what makes it useful.
But in fact, if you, if you really look at
what makes a good society, uh, we would recognize
that there's so many employment opportunities,
so many jobs on which we rely that are not there for profit,
that are absolutely fundamental
to the smooth functioning of a society.
So we can think about employment in healthcare.
We can think about employment in climate work, in
Various in Education, where the,
the returns might not be visible.
They may not be immediately financial, their returns
to the greater wellbeing of the society.
And so we really, uh, need
to be thinking in broader terms about
what makes the good life and what kind
of employment is required
to support the well functioning of an economy.
And I think the final one that's really worth mentioning is
that a lot of social problems are related
to the absence of decent work.
Uh, we know very well from research that, um, mental
and physical health deteriorates quite rapidly, um, for,
uh, uh, for those who who don't have stable, uh,
or any employment.
Um, we know that there's such a thing as economic crime,
you know, petty theft, um, and other, uh, problems.
Uh, we, um, so not only are people, uh, sicker and weaker,
but that creates the very conditions
that might prevent them from then taking
employment subsequently.
So the, the job guarantee is really effective at addressing
those social costs, but not only eliminating them,
but also preventing them.
And I think this is one thing
that's missing in our overall approach to economic problems.
We don't have preventative solutions.
We always, you know, allow unemployment to develop,
and then we scratch our heads,
and then we think, what golly can we do
to bring those people back into the lame
or market as opposed
to simply have an open-ended employment opportunity
and then prevent the, the problems associated?
Especially with long-term unemployment,
A job guarantee offers a much more humane
and effective way to stabilize the economy.
Instead of controlling inflation through unemployment,
the government links spending directly to productive work
by offering a job to anyone who wants one
with a job guarantee involuntary unemployment is effectively
eliminated anyone willing
and able to work is able
to access a job providing a minimum level
of income and security.
The wage for This job should be set at a level
that supports a minimum decent standard
of living in our society.
And for this purpose, we can use respected benchmarks such
as the Joseph Roundtree Foundation's
minimum income standard.
The program establishes a wage flow across the whole
economy, so workers are no longer forced to accept low pay,
unsafe or precarious working conditions just to get by.
This is Especially important
for people in the gig economy
who are still in zero hours contracts or in other insecure
and poorly protected forms of work to retain workers.
Employers must offer pay
and conditions that are at least as good
as the job guarantee alternative, while those who prefer
to stay in these kinds of jobs for flexibility purposes,
remain free to do so.
My name is Daniel Kotzer. I am an economist.
I actually the chief economist
of the International Trade Union Confederation,
and I have a long experience in labor market issues
and in relation to more precisely to job guarantee,
I was in the team
that drafted the first employment guarantee program in
Argentina that was called the Plan Hefe Yogurt.
That was the plan implemented
after the crisis in 2002, 2003 in Argentina.
Argentina underwent in the nineties a very typical
neoliberal Washington consensus type of policies that
aod the productive capacity of the country
that reduce the formal employment,
increase unemployment significantly.
At the same time, that also increased poverty.
By the end of the 2001, the level
of unemployment was almost 25%.
Poverty was above 55%,
and the unrest was so massive
that induced social protests that, uh, ended up with the,
with the changes of change in governments
and also the need of a major public intervention in order
to reduce the crisis.
So what specifically are you trying
to achieve with the program?
With the program that was, as I mentioned,
what we were trying was to cover a large
and increasing unemployment in the country where we saw
that month
after month, the number of people looking for a job
and without having a job, was increasing.
But also we saw that many people was
what we may call discouraged workers,
that they didn't even go to look for a job
because they found no opportunities.
So the objective was to provide the job in order to
transfer an income to these households, to these people,
and reduce poverty
and unemployment rate, which are very, I would say,
sensitive, uh, indicators of, uh, the political, uh,
the political distress of the population.
And, and what were the biggest challenges you found
when introducing the program?
Well, the challenges are at, at different levels.
You know, the first challenge is to convince politicians
that you are giving something
that's more called like an entitlement rather than a
traditional social policy of targeting
and allocating in the different groups.
So that was the, the, the, the first thing.
The second challenge was try to assess
how many people was going to go into the program.
Another challenge was how to organize the people
that would go into the program to avoid, you know,
the political, uh, patronizing of allocating
to this one yes, and to this other no, just try
to make universal.
And then the, the other challenge was to find activities
that would be useful for the community
In the uk. Some
programs have been described
as job guarantees in the past, such
as labor's youth guarantee, for example.
But this differs significantly from a universal public job
guarantee to begin with.
People are often forced to take part, risking the loss
of benefits if they refuse jobs that they did not choose,
and are given little chance to gain useful experience
or improve their long-term prospects.
They're also not universally available, usually restricted
by quotas and often paying only the legal minimum wage,
which many agree is not enough
to meet basic living standards, where still many
of these schemes allow for-profit companies
to access subsidized labor.
This creates a risk of displacing
existing non-subsidized workers rather than creating
new socially useful work.
I would say every single country could afford this type
of program, number one, because they're counter cyclical.
Yeah. The, that's the, the, the, the best idea of this type
of program is to have it always implemented.
So you have like a buffer stock, you know, of, of jobs
that they are available when the economy goes down,
people move from the private sector to this type of program,
and then when the economy goes up, they move to the, to the,
to the other side of the, of the market.
So, uh, if they work as a buffer stock,
you will never need huge amounts of money
because it will be precisely to reduce the cycle.
Like, uh, uh, many economies, they, they,
they point out as a, one of the objectives
of this type of program.
So, uh, I don't think that the cost
of a program is the main, the main topic.
They are, I would say, the best, eh,
social policy at the very reasonable cost in terms
of the fiscal space needed.
The job quarantee is, uh, uh,
simply put a direct employment approach.
Um, it is an approach that employs, uh, those
who are looking for, uh, good jobs in, uh, positions
that, uh, do public service
or address challenges such as the climate challenges.
The job Guity is conceived as a broader program, uh,
for employment, one that, uh, will be redirected
to various social needs.
They could be care needs, they could be, uh,
environmental needs, they could be community needs.
But I think that probably the most urgent, um, uh,
threat we all have to address
as society is the climate threat.
And that ripples through our communities,
that affects the way we care for each other.
That affects the way our, you know, our hotels
and cities can be livable communities.
And so the job guarantee essentially thinks through the kind
of investments that are necessary, um, for, uh,
for a climate work, and then creates those opportunities.
We can think of, uh, small projects like, um, you know,
greening our cities.
You can think of trees as the lungs of our towns
and our communities.
We can think about community gardens
that provide locally sourced food
that is not dependent on supply chains across the globe
and produce sustainable quality food for everyone.
We can think of large scale investments, um, as I said,
you know, installation of panels, solar panels of, uh,
wind turbines, various other solutions to energy production.
So we can think, uh, very broadly of what is required.
And the job guarantee doesn't rely on incentives waiting
around for the private sector
to figure out the precise return in order to direct
its activities in that area.
It is a very direct
and straightforward, uh, approach to the problem.
In fact, two problems, the problem of unemployment
and the problem of, of the green transition.
A universal public job guarantee is
fundamentally different.
It's nationally funded and delivered locally.
So communities decide what work is needed
and valuable in their areas.
Funding expands where more people need jobs
and contracts as the economy recovers, directing,
support exactly where and when it is required.
Instead of paying the high social costs of unemployment,
we invest in useful work, making better use
of public resources while strengthening local economies.
Local priorities shape job creation,
making the program more responsive and democratic.
The program is open to nonprofits, cooperatives,
and social enterprises that meet clear standards.
All jobs follow national
and local guidelines to ensure
that they provide real community benefit, build skills,
and do not replace existing public sector roles
or unfairly compete
with well provisioned commercial activity.
Most importantly, people themselves can take the lead
individuals or even small teams of up
to five people can propose
and deliver projects that address local needs
with support from their local authorities.
The result is practical, community-driven work
that unlocks local talent, strengthens neighborhoods,
and ensures that everyone can access decent,
meaningful employment.
In the age of ai that has become more important than ever.